So first of all transacting in
Bitcoin at this present time it's
actually quite easy.
So ironically even though
Bitcoin is not an actual coin,
what you need is a wallet and
your wallet can even be a physical wallet,
though that's probably not ideal.
What your wallet is, it's a place
to store your Bitcoin credentials,
which means your private key.
Now what exactly is a private key?
It's a 256 bit number
expressed as a hexadecimal, so
here on the slides is an example.
Now this key is generated
using cryptography.
So if you lose your key
there's no way to get it back.
So when people say they've
lost their Bitcoin,
it's their private key that they've lost.
So there's simply no way without
the private key to access Bitcoin.
On the other hand,
if someone somehow takes your private key,
then they have your Bitcoin,
you have no recourse.
Using your private key you can generate
your unique address which is public,
and this allows you to
sign off on transactions.
So with all that as background current
third party software such as Coinbase for
example, which can be simply
downloaded to your phone.
It does all of this for you and
stores your private key within its created
digital wallet and then also access is for
you a Bitcoin exchange.
You can separately however
choose a wallet and an exchange.
And in the sphere of Bitcoin
the wallet can doesn't need
to be a third party can be peer to peer.
Interestingly you can also buy
Bitcoin with cash using an ATM, and
there are several even on
Lancaster Avenue here in Philadelphia.
What the Bitcoin ATM will then give you is
a hard copy of your private key which you
can then keep on an actual wallet, but
you should probably transfer to a digital
wallet for security and
ease of transactions.
Once you own Bitcoin,
you can purchase goods or
services from other users using bitcoin or
merchants.
There's no distinction in Bitcoin
between users and merchants.
You can trade Bitcoin back to dollars and
again to Bitcoin.
You can trade it for
other cryptocurrencies, in other words,
Bitcoin is a currency, like any other.
However, while Bitcoin is a currency,
it is nothing but a currency.
It is not like say a stock, which is
a claim to ownership in a company.
Or a treasury bill, which you can think of
as a claim to the income of US taxpayers.
Which is to say that as a currency it
has value as a medium of exchange.
Now it doesn't need to have value as
a medium of exchange at the moment.
But unless people believe that it can
eventually function as a medium of
exchange in some states of the world,
Bitcoin has no inherent value.
So as we think about those opening quotes
the idea that Bitcoin is a fraud or
rat poison in the school yard.
There is some truth to that because one
possible value to Bitcoin is always zero.
However, might Bitcoin function someday
as a generalised medium of exchange.
So some people clearly think this
is impossible, thus the fraud,
thus the bubble.
But to really answer this question,
we need to consider what we
actually mean by currency.
So here's the currency that we
normally think of, the US dollar.
So the US dollar is fiat money,
it's not linked to say anything like gold.
Now in the US the US dollar is legal
tender, now what exactly does that mean?
Many people think that merchants
are required to take US dollars but
that's not true.
What it actually means is that the
Treasury is required to take dollars as
payment for taxes.
And if someone owes you money you
are required to take dollars as payment.
So legal tender is short for legal
tender for all debts public and private.
So the requirement to accept dollars for
private debt is by fiat.
It is backed by the power of the sovereign
in this case, the US government.
Now ultimately the authority of
the sovereign rests with the ability to
enforce the law and all the enforcement
mechanisms we are familiar with,
the courts, the police,
possibly even the army.
So that's what's lying
behind this fiat money,
the fact that it's payment for
debts, public and private.
And that we can enforce the fact that it's
payment for debts, public and private.
But of course, that's not the only use for
dollars, so the fiat of the US government
does not extend to private businesses
accepting dollars for payment.
And of course, it does not extend to all
of the transactions all over the world,
both legal and illegal,
that take place using dollars.
But these transactions do occur, and
apparently more frequently than ever,
is that the demand for dollars as
paper currency is actually growing.
So these transactions occur,
because we are in
what the economists call a self-fulfilling
equilibrium when it comes to US currency.
Everyone agrees to take US dollars
because they believe that everyone will
take US dollars,
now what does this rest on?
Well ultimately it rests on the fact that
dollars can pay taxes and discharge debt.
And to the rule of law there's really
nothing else other than the beliefs of
all individuals that
everyone will take dollar.
So this is what we mean by
self-fulfilling equilibrium.
So the bottom line is what
makes a currency a currency,
namely a medium of exchange, are the
common beliefs of the individual users.
Now that's dollars, but apparently
using physical dollars is sufficiently
cumbersome that a profitable industry
has a reason to allow us to avoid it.
For example, nearly all merchants
accept Visa and MasterCard,
most merchants accept four major
credit cards, Visa, Master Cards,
plus Discover and American Express.
But these cards are very costly for
merchants, they need to pay a fee,
that can be over 2% of the transactions.
Interestingly enough,
by law, merchants are not allowed
to offer discounts for cash.
Which means these cards are very
profitable for the credit card companies,
and they are nice for consumers because
consumers receive tax free benefits.
Because customers demand
the use of these cards,
merchants have to use them despite the
fees, otherwise they risk losing business.
And the fact that they're not allowed to
price discriminate means that these card
companies form an oligopoly that may be
under threat in various ways by fintech,
that's discussed in other modules.
But at the moment, the oligopoly still
seems to be pretty strong seeing as
the fees have recently been raised.
Now technically using these cards
implies that one is taking on debt,
which is an alternative form of
payment other than currency.
But in practice,
the distinction between debt and
say a bank account is
perhaps not very important.
Both credit card companies and your bank,
which you may access with a debit card or
potentially with PayPal, are what's
known as centralized intermediaries.
All the transactions are still
done in terms of dollars, but
the credit card company or
the bank keeps track of the accounts and
verifies the legitimacy
of the transaction.
The intermediary in other words
maintains a centralized ledger.
This is why stores take credit cards and
debit cards instead of money.
They do not have to worry that they
will not receive their funds because
the intermediary ensures that
the centralized ledger is accurate.
So the credit cards are costly, yes,
but it does avoid what used to happen
long time ago in which merchants
had to keep their own ledgers,
and had to keep track of which
customers checks would not bounce.
And of course a big applications is
that it allows anonymous transactions
Internet transactions when you have
no idea who you're transacting with.
So to briefly recap,
Bitcoin is a currency like any other,
as a currency it can function as a medium
of exchange or a store of value.
Now in the US we have a great
medium of exchange dollars.
The functionality of dollars as a medium
of exchange is through common beliefs.
And the profitable industry of centralized
intermediaries has grown up to facilitate
dollar transactions without the direct use
of dollars, through a centralized ledger.
So given this landscape,
where does cryptocurrency come in?